Workflow update dec 19 (#1)
phil-blain/CICE-Consortium-About-Us-wiki: Git-Workflow-Guidance.md

> Use different sandboxes for different branches.

Author: > Use different sandboxes for different branches.

I'm not sure why we advise on doing that... I think that using a single "'main" clone forces you to understand Git more, which is beneficial in my opinion.

Reviewer: I think switching between branches while doing development just introduces risk.  It's easy to lose code changes, make changes to incorrect branches, start a test suite then change a branch and end up with utter chaos, and so forth.  For experts, it's fine to have a main clone.  For most folks, that's not how they should start.

Author: > start a test suite then change a branch and end up with utter chaos, and so forth.

haha I get you !

* Be very careful with every pull and push command to make sure it's from/to the right repo/fork/branch and contains what is intended.  
_Use ‘git status’ and ‘git remote -v’ frequently._

> * When working with CICE, treat Icepack as a separate repository.  If you need to modify both Icepack and CICE together, clone your own version of Icepack to use within CICE, create a new branch in each, and commit and push Icepack and CICE changes separately.  Do not worry about the submodule status initially.

Author: >  If you need to modify both Icepack and CICE together, clone your own version of Icepack to use within CICE,

I think this is overly complicated, and is not a "Git" way of doing things. I'll suggest an alternative workflow below.

See also our [Software Development Practices](https://github.com/CICE-Consortium/About-Us/wiki/Software-Development-Practices).

## Git Overview
CICE consists of a top level driver and dynamical core plus the Icepack code which is included as a git submodule.  Because Icepack is a submodule of CICE, Icepack and CICE development are handled somewhat independently with respect to the github repositories even though development and testing may be done together and in the same sandbox.  

Only a limited number of users are able to push to the CICE-Consortium repositories.  Users will be working on personal forks and executing pull requests to merge their changes into the CICE-Consortium repositories.  If you plan to work within the CICE-Consortium project, create a github account (https://github.com) if you don’t have one already.

> A good tutorial on the overall git workflow is at [atlassian's comparing-workflows page](https://www.atlassian.com/git/tutorials/comparing-workflows).  We will be following most of the ideas discussed in those workflows.  Details about using git can be found at the git-scm site or use google search.

Author: ```suggestion
A good tutorial on the overall Git workflow we use is Atlassian's Comparing Workflows tutorial, especially the [Forking Workflow](https://www.atlassian.com/git/tutorials/comparing-workflows/forking-workflow) and [Feature Branch Workflow](https://www.atlassian.com/git/tutorials/comparing-workflows/feature-branch-workflow) pages.  We will be following most of the ideas discussed in those workflows. Details about using Git can be found on the [official Git website](https://git-scm.com/doc) or using a Google search.
```

I think we should link directly to the "Forking Workflow" and "Feature Branch Worflow" pages as they are the one related to our workflow.

Author: Maybe linking to the [Centralized Workflow](https://www.atlassian.com/git/tutorials/comparing-workflows#centralized-workflow) would also be useful, for guidance on the case where several developers work on the same branch on the same repo, but the tutorial uses only the master branch whereas we would use a feature branch, so I think that might just be confusing to new Git users.

Author: The ["Centralized Workflow" page](https://www.atlassian.com/git/tutorials/comparing-workflows#centralized-workflow) could also be useful for the case of several developers working on the same branch in the same repo, but the "Centralized Workflow" uses only the `master` branch, whereas we would use a feature branch so I think it might just be confusing.

Reviewer: If there are better ways to point to outside resources, I'm for it.

> There are a few basics to understand about git.  It is distributed.  That means there are actually multiple repositories.  For instance, normally there will be the github CICE-Consortium repository, a user’s github forked repository, and a local repository on your local machine associated with your sandbox.  The sandbox just contains a particular version from your repository like the head of a specific branch.  The sandbox is where you work.  To download a copy of the repository to a local file system, you clone it in git, that creates the local repository and sets up the sandbox.  That sandbox will be set to the head of the master branch initially and will contain all branches and tags from the remote repository at the time of the clone.  You can update your local repository from any other repository by using fetch and merge (aka pull).  When you commit, you are migrating changes from your sandbox to your local repository.  Use push to migrate changes in the local repository back to your fork.  Once your fork is ready, those changes will be migrated to the CICE-Consortium repository by executing a pull request.   To update your local sandbox, you execute a pull from a github repository.  More generally, you can pull or push from/to any github repository.

Author: ```suggestion
There are a few basics to understand about Git.  It is distributed.  That means there are actually multiple repositories.  For instance, normally there will be the GitHub CICE-Consortium repository, a user’s GitHub forked repository, and a local repository on your local machine associated with your working tree.  The working tree just contains a particular version from your repository like the head of a specific branch.  The working tree is where you work.  To download a copy of the repository to a local file system, you clone it in Git, that creates the local repository and sets up the working tree.  That working tree will be set to the head of the master branch initially and the local repository will contain all branches and tags from the remote repository at the time of the clone.  You can update your local repository from any other repository by using fetch and merge (aka pull).  When you commit, you are migrating changes from your working tree to your local repository.  Use push to migrate changes in the local repository back to your fork.  Once your fork is ready, those changes will be migrated to the CICE-Consortium repository by executing a pull request.   To update your local repository and working tree, you execute a pull from a GitHub repository.  More generally, you can pull or push from/to any GitHub repository.
```
"Sandbox" is not generally a term used by Git tutorials/documentation. This means that a potential Google search 
by new users will not really help them. I think it's better to use the right terminology, i.e. [working tree](https://git-scm.com/docs/gitglossary#Documentation/gitglossary.txt-aiddefworkingtreeaworkingtree)

Reviewer: I'm open to that.  I'd like to query the rest of the group what they think.

_**Figure: Relationship between CICE consortium repositories and git commands**_

# Getting Started with Git

## Setup a Github Account

You can clone (checkout) the CICE-Consortium code without a Github account, but if you want to have your own repository and contribute, you'll need a Github account.  To setup a Github account, go to [github.com](https://github.com) and click on the SignUp button in the upper right hand side.

Thereafter, you will SignIn when you go to github.com.

## Local Git Initialization
Before using git on any platform, it’s useful to set a few things.  Execute the following commands,

>       git config --global user.name "Your Github Username"

Author: ```suggestion
       git config --global user.name "FirstName LastName"
```
Git commits should be attributed to your real name in my opinion.

Reviewer: I'm fine with that.  I think it can be left to the user as well.

You only need to set these once for each independent platform, they will be stored in the file ~/.gitconfig

## Setting Up Github Forks

Users should create personal github forks of CICE and Icepack to carry out any development of the CICE or Icepack source code.  To create a fork (you do this once), 
* Go to the repository page (ie. https://github.com/CICE-Consortium/CICE or https://github.com/CICE-Consortium/Icepack)
* In the upper right hand corner, click on “fork”
* Click on your github avatar/username
* A fork will be created on your github page (ie. https:// github.com/username/CICE)

Each repository (CICE and Icepack) have to be forked separately and users are encouraged to fork both repositories.

> We encourage development on branches in forks and for the fork master to generally remain up to date with the Consortium version.  This makes it easier to branch in the fork from a Consortium version of master.

Author: ```suggestion
 We encourage development on separate feature branches in forks and for the fork `master` branch to generally remain up to date with the Consortium version.  This makes it easier to create new branches in the fork from a Consortium version of `master`, and to propose changes via Pull Requests to the Consortium repository.
```

Reviewer: Looks good.

## Updating Your Github Fork master

We’re getting a little ahead with respect to documentation but to keep your fork master up to date with the consortium master, pull from the CICE-Consortium to your local sandbox, commit locally, and then push those changes to your fork.  Typically, this looks like for Icepack

      git clone https://github.com/username/Icepack
      cd Icepack
      git remote add upstream https://github.com/CICE-Consortium/Icepack

>       git pull upstream master

Author: if we really want to make sure that developers do not commit on their `master` branch, we could instruct them to run `git pull --ff-only upstream master`, which will abort if their master has diverged with the Consortium master.  What do you think ?

We’re getting a little ahead with respect to documentation but to keep your fork master up to date with the consortium master, pull from the CICE-Consortium to your local sandbox, commit locally, and then push those changes to your fork.  Typically, this looks like
We’re getting a little ahead with respect to documentation but to keep your fork master up to date with the consortium master, pull from the CICE-Consortium to your local sandbox, commit locally, and then push those changes to your fork.  Typically, this looks like for Icepack

      git clone https://github.com/username/Icepack
      cd Icepack
      git remote add upstream https://github.com/CICE-Consortium/Icepack
      git pull upstream master
      git push origin master

      git clone https://github.com/username/CICE --recursive  # first-time only
and for CICE

      git clone https://github.com/username/CICE 
      cd CICE

>       git remote add upstream https://github.com/CICE-Consortium/CICE  # first-time only

Author: I added that because if you use a single clone, you should only have to add the `upstream` remote once.

Reviewer: I don't want to confuse this by saying first time only.   That only is helpful if you work in a main clone, which I contend is not what we want to recommend.  Also, running git remote add upstream when it's already existing does not create any problems.

      git remote add upstream https://github.com/CICE-Consortium/CICE
      git pull upstream master

>       git submodule update

Author: This step is important to maintain a clean `git status` in CICE if you cloned CICE some time ago, and Icepack was since updated in the Consortium repo, because `git pull` will _fetch_ Icepack, but will **not** update your Icepack working tree and HEAD (this is explained here: https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Tools-Submodules#_pulling_in_upstream_changes_from_the_submodule_remote). At that point the Icepack repo still has the old version of Icepack checked out.

Also, if you just cloned CICE this step is a noop so it does not hurt to keep it.

Reviewer: I'm not convinced we need git submodule update at this step.  All this is showing is how to update your fork master.  It's not about creating a sandbox.  Later, you'll create a branch, switch to the branch, and do git submodule update.  The git submodule update is NOT needed as part of the process to update your master fork.

> This entire process clones your fork master which creates a local repo and sandbox, pulls changes from the CICE-Consortium (ie. upstream) master into your local sandbox (which commits those changes to your local repository), and pushes those changes to your fork (origin).  We encourage all users to NOT commit local changes to master (always work on a branch), and to keep the fork master up to date with the consortium master.

Author: ```suggestion
This entire process clones your fork, which creates a local repo and working tree and checks out the `master` branch, pulls changes from the CICE-Consortium (ie. upstream) `master` into your local working tree (also commiting those changes to your local repository), and pushes those changes to your fork (origin).  We encourage all users to NOT commit local changes to the `master` branch (always work on a separate feature branch), and to keep the fork `master` up to date with the Consortium `master`.
```

## Clone 

> **(checkout or creating a Sandbox)**

Author: ```suggestion
**(Setting up a local repository and working tree)**
```

> When you clone, your sandbox will be set to the head of the master branch.  You can also specify a local directory name with git clone 

Author: ```suggestion
 When you clone, the head of the master branch will be checked out in you working tree.  

Note: You can also specify a local directory name for your clone:
```

I'd make a new line here since these are separate ideas.

You will usually branch from the head of the consortium master, and this is good time to update your fork's master as part of the process,

      git clone https://github.com/username/CICE cice.mybranch
      cd cice.mybranch
      git remote add upstream https://github.com/cice-consortium/CICE
      git pull upstream master
      git push origin master
      git branch mybranch
      git checkout mybranch

>       git submodule update --init

Author: Not sure why the `git submodule update` command was moved. To maintain a clean status at (almost) all steps it makes more sense to do it immediately after the pull.

Reviewer: I disagree as also noted above.  I think it's cleaner to do the submodule update --init after you checkout your branch.  Lets say the branch existed before and already pointed to a different version of Icepack.  You would need to do the submodule update after the checkout.  But there is no reason to do it before.

Author: > Lets say the branch existed before and already pointed to a different version of Icepack. You would need to do the submodule update after the checkout. But there is no reason to do it before.

In this section we talk about creating a *new* branch. The case where the branch already exists is treated above, and we do mention that `git submodule update` must be ran after `git checkout`.
If the branch already exists and we do `git branch my branch` we are faced with 
> `fatal: A branch named 'next' already exists.`

so this is not what we are talking about here.

For me, the main point is that it is super confusing for beginners that a `git pull` that does not result in conflicts would leave you working tree unclean, i.e. not at the state that was just pulled, bceause the submodule working tree is not updated. That is why I want to run `git submodule update` just after `git pull`. 

We could also instruct users to just always run `git pull --recurse-submodules`, which takes care of updating the submodules worktree(s) automatically.

The first 5 lines above just update master in your fork with the consortium version.  Then the branch is created from the head of master, it is checked out, and then the submodule is checked out.  

> We recommend that you give your branches meaningful names, because you likely will create and use many of them, and this helps identify pull requests.  E.g. for a bug fix, you might use something like “bugfix_thermo_conductivity.”  We recommend you work only on branches in your fork and that master is consistent with the CICE-Consortium repository.  **NOTE: When you execute “git checkout”, you will switch branches and may lose local modifications that have not been committed so BE CAREFUL with checkout.** You can use “git stash” to save local changes and then recover them later.

Author: ```suggestion
We recommend that you give your branches meaningful names, because you likely will create and use many of them, and this helps identify pull requests.  E.g. for a bug fix, you might use something like “bugfix_thermo_conductivity.”  We recommend you work only on branches in your fork and that master is consistent with the CICE-Consortium repository.  Note that when you execute “git checkout”, Git will refuse to switch branches if any local modifications conflict with the state of the branch your are switching to. You can use “git stash” to save local changes and then recover them later with `git stash apply`.
```

[Local modifications are kept when doing `git checkout`](https://git-scm.com/docs/git-checkout#Documentation/git-checkout.txt-emgitcheckoutemltbranchgt). They are only discarded if doing `git chekcout --force`.

Reviewer: I agree and think we should change the wording.  I didn't up to now because I wasn't 100% sure that what was written isn't possibly true sometimes.  I have never encountered it myself, but someone else seems to have.

      git checkout currentbranch
      git branch newbranch
      git checkout newbranch
      git submodule update --init

or even better

      git clone https://github.com/username/CICE cice.mybranch
      cd cice.mybranch
      git remote add upstream https://github.com/cice-consortium/CICE
      git pull upstream master
      git push origin master
      git branch newbranch
      git checkout newbranch
      git pull origin oldbranch
      git submodule update --init

This branches off the current Consortium master but then pulls in any changes to the newbranch from the oldbranch.

To delete a branch in your local repository

      git checkout master
      git branch -d branchname

To delete a branch in your remote repository

      git push origin --delete branchname

If your branch has a submodule (all CICE branches should since Icepack is a submodule!), when you switch to the branch, you may want to update your submodule via a sync and update call,

      cd CICE
      git checkout branchname

>       git submodule sync

Author: `git submodule sync` is not necessary. What it does is it synchronizes the information in  `.gitmodules` with the configuration files  `.git/config` and `.git/modules/icepack/config`. 

It is only necessary to issue this command if the URL of the Icepack submodule changes.

Reviewer: I largely agree.  This is one of those cases where you don't always need to do it, but if you do, it's important not to forget it.  It also doesn't hurt to do it.  I'd like us to tend towards information that what will always work rather than creating multiple examples with sometimes confusing (to new users) if tests.  If users follow our recommendations, the submodule repo will never be changed and sync will never be needed.  But it doesn't hurt to have it here.

> In this case, add specifies both new AND modified files that need to be committed.  You can also use `git commit -a` to automatically add modified files, but please review the git documentation first.

Author: ```suggestion
 In this case, add specifies both new AND modified files that need to be committed.
```
As I mentioned in another comment, I think we should not advocate `git commit -a`.

> When you `git add` or `git rm` files, `git status` will no longer show them as being different, but they are NOT yet committed to your local repository.  You must do `git commit` to commit the actual code changes.

Author: ```suggestion
When you `git add` or `git rm` files, `git status` will no longer show them as "Changes not staged for commit:", but as "Changes to be committed:";  they are NOT yet committed to your local repository.  You must do `git commit` to commit the actual code changes.
```

# Pushing and Pulling

> Pushing and Pulling are operations associated with migrating changes between repositories.  You push something if you are acting on the “sending” side and you pull something if you are on the “receiving” side.  To push or pull, you should specify both the repository and what is being migrated explicitly, and you will need write access to that repository.  The git remote command is extremely useful in push and pull operations.

Author: ```suggestion
Pushing and Pulling are operations associated with migrating changes between repositories.  You push something if you are acting on the “sending” side and you pull something if you are on the “receiving” side.  To push or pull, you should specify both the repository and what is being migrated explicitly, and you will need write access to push to a repository.  The git remote command is extremely useful in push and pull operations.
```

      git pull origin mybranch

This pulls mybranch from the origin repository to your local repository.  It is important to keep your local branch synced up with your remote repository when multiple people are developing in the same repository+branch.  

When you pull, it's possible conflicts will arise.  If they do, git will let you know and you'll have to manually reconcile those conflicts.

When you pull, you are just integrating local and remote commits on a commit-by-commit basis by time.  Another way to operate is to rebase.  When you rebase, the remote commits are checked out and then your local commits are "replayed" on top.  This will change your local commit history, but can be advantageous in terms of keeping track of commit history and doing pull requests.  To rebase,

      git pull --rebase origin branchname

A pull is the same thing as a fetch and a merge.  There are some cases where it may be better to do a fetch, review the changes (git diff), and then do a merge.  So

      git pull origin branchname

Is the same as

      git fetch origin
      git merge origin/branchname

## Some Examples

### Update fork master from Consortium master

> As noted [earlier in this document](https://github.com/CICE-Consortium/About-Us/wiki/Git-Workflow-Guidance#updating-your-github-fork-master), if you want to update your master fork to recent changes in the CICE-Consortium master, you would pull from the consortium and push to your fork as follows

Author: ```suggestion
As noted [earlier in this document](https://github.com/CICE-Consortium/About-Us/wiki/Git-Workflow-Guidance#updating-your-github-fork-master), if you want to update your fork `master` with recent changes in the CICE-Consortium master, you would pull from the Consortium and push to your fork as follows:
```

### Update fork master from Consortium master

As noted [earlier in this document](https://github.com/CICE-Consortium/About-Us/wiki/Git-Workflow-Guidance#updating-your-github-fork-master), if you want to update your master fork to recent changes in the CICE-Consortium master, you would pull from the consortium and push to your fork as follows

      git checkout master
      git remote add upstream https://github.com/CICE-Consortium/CICE
      git pull upstream master      # pulls upstream repo master to local repo and sandbox

>       git submodule update          # updates your Icepack submodule sandbox to the version you just pulled

Author: Again, this step is required to complete the update. If not, the Icepack directory still has the old version of its files checked out.

Reviewer: I disagree.  It may have the old files checked out but it makes no different for the push to your master branch.  It is not needed at this step.

Author: It's true that it is not 100% necessary if the goal is to just update one's remote repository on GitHub. 
If the developer follows the advice above ("Branch" section), then when he·she creates a new branch off master he will then run `git submodule update` and the Icepack working tree will be correctly synchronized before the developer starts work on the feature branch.

So it's not necessary but I think it does not hurt.

      git push origin master        # pushes your local repo master to your fork

A similar process can be used to update a branch.  However, on a branch, we recommend using rebase rather than pull.  Pull merges upstream and local changes based on time of commit.  Rebase updates the local repository by first rebasing the repository from the upstream source and then replaying your local commits on top of the rebase.  That means your local changes are always built on top of the base.  This would look like
### Update a branch from Consortium master

A similar process can be used to update a branch.  However, on a branch, we recommend using rebase rather than pull.  Pull merges upstream and local changes based on time of commit.  Rebase updates the local repository by first "rebasing" the repository from the upstream source and then "replaying" your local commits on top of the rebase.  That means your local changes are always built on top of the base.  This would look like

      git checkout branchname
      git remote add upstream https://github.com/CICE-Consortium/CICE
      git pull --rebase upstream master

>       git submodule update

Author: Same thing here, `git submodule update` is needed to complete the update and checkout Icepack at the commit that is recorded in the just-pulled Consortium `master`

Reviewer: It is not needed for this step.

Author: Here we are rebasing a feature branch. 
Let's say that the branch contains no Icepack modifications, and that when the developer runs `git pull --rebase upstream master`  the icepack submodule was updated upstream to a new version. 

If we do not update the submodule working tree, the next time the developers runs `git commit -a` (which he·she should not but happens often), Icepack will be automatically included in the commit and this commit will **regress** the submodule pointer (to the version it was at when the developer's branch was first created off master.) This is super dangerous. 
Icepack will show up in the PR page as modified, the reviewers will have to notice it, and the developer will have to fix it. We want to avoid such complicated and confusing back and forth.

This is a case where I feel it is mandatory to run `git submodule update` if we don't want Icepack to be regressed by mistake.

> The push works fine if it is just a fast-forward (consistent history) push.  If you have pushed the branch to your remote repository before the rebase, it probably won't be a fast-forward as the history of your local repository and the remote repository have diverged.  To overcome this, you'll have to do one of two things.  Either force the push and overwrite the history on your branch in your repo.  This is perfectly fine if nobody else is working in your branch.  That would look like

Author: ```suggestion
The push works fine if it is just a fast-forward (linear history) push.  If you have pushed the branch to your remote repository before the rebase, it probably won't be a fast-forward as the history of your local repository and the remote repository have diverged.  To overcome this, you'll have to do one of two things.  

The first option is to force the push and overwrite the history on your branch in your fork.  This is perfectly fine if nobody else is working in your branch.  That would look like
```

I think that's more precise.

Reviewer: I agree.

> The force-with-lease (versus just force) checks whether you might overwrite non-local commits on your branch before forcing.  This prevents remote commits by others from being lost.  The other option is to switch to a new branch and pull changes from the old branch,

Author: ```suggestion
The force-with-lease option (versus just force) checks whether you might overwrite non-local commits on your branch before forcing.  This prevents remote commits by others from being lost.  

The other option is to switch to a new branch and pull changes from the old branch,
```

      git checkout master
      git remote add upstream https://github.com/CICE-Consortium/CICE
      git pull upstream master 

>       git push origin master 

Author: Here also, `git submodule update` is needed after pull.

      git branch newbranch
      git checkout newbranch
      git pull origin oldbranch

Now you have a new branch based on the current Consortium master with changes from the old branch.

> Pull and rebase can result in conflicts.  If there are conflicts, they will be reported and you will have to fix them to continue.  With pull, you will have to resolve the conflicts and commit manually.  With rebase, you will have to resolve the conflicts and use git rebase --continue.  See the git documentation for more details about handling conflicts.  In summary, to rebase a branch with conflicts, do the following

Author: ```suggestion
Pull and rebase can result in conflicts.  If there are conflicts, they will be reported and you will have to fix them to continue.  With pull, you will have to resolve the conflicts and either commit manually or run `git merge --continue`.  With rebase, you will have to resolve the conflicts and use `git rebase --continue`.  See the Git documentation for [more details](https://git-scm.com/docs/git-merge#_how_conflicts_are_presented) about handling conflicts.  **NOTE**: the terminology used by Git when there are conflicts is reversed when using `git rebase` (or `git pull --rebase`) versus when using `git merge` (or `git pull`). [This page](https://nitaym.github.io/ourstheirs/) clearly explains the differences.

In summary, to rebase a branch with conflicts, do the following
```

I think linking to https://www.atlassian.com/git/tutorials/using-branches/merge-conflicts could also be good, but the official doc is pretty readable in this case in my opinion. 
The ours/theirs difference is important to mention in my opinion, because it can be quite confusing when someone does not know that and runs a rebase that results in conflicts.

Reviewer: Sounds good, thanks.

      git clone https://github.com/username/CICE --recursive
      git checkout branchname
      git remote add upstream https://github.com/CICE-Consortium/CICE

>       git pull --rebase upstream master (or git fetch upstream master; git rebase upstream/master)

Author: ```suggestion
      git pull --rebase upstream master (or git fetch upstream master; git rebase upstream/master)
      git submodule update
```

Again, `git submodule update` should be ran as soon as possible, because  `git status` will be used often during the rebase if there are conflicts, and the icepack submodule would appear as "modified (new commits)", which can be confusing (because the person doing the rebase did not do these "new commits"!). 
Also, the **last** thing we want is for the person doing the rebase to `git add icepack` and continue the rebase, because doing so would regress the submodule in `branchname` to the commit it was on when `branchname` was forked off `master`.
Then a PR for that branch would show submodule changes, whereas no submodule changes were intended.
By making sure the Icepack checkout is in sync with what is recorded in CICE, Icepack does not appear as "modified", so it cannot be added and the mistake above cannot happen.

Reviewer: I am fine adding git submodule update here where there could be problems later.  But as long as git add icepack is not done, it should not matter.  I think the reason to justify a git submodule update here is to support testing of the rebased cice code, and less because of issues with the commit/push.  To test your rebased code properly, you'll probably have to run git submodule update.  But this also depends what's in the Icepack directory.

Author: It's true that is partly to reduce confusion and chances of mistakes in regards to Git operations, and also (you are right) because to compile/test the rebased branch Icepack will need to be in sync.

Note that if it makes sense to add it here, then it also makes sense to add it at 
https://github.com/phil-blain/CICE-Consortium-About-Us-wiki/pull/1/files#diff-f8ab4d060c906e1f7cacf1117d9dc71dL286
and at 
https://github.com/phil-blain/CICE-Consortium-About-Us-wiki/pull/1/files#diff-f8ab4d060c906e1f7cacf1117d9dc71dR366
because both of these scenarios are also about updating a feature branch with respect to the Consortium master.

      > hand edit conflicts
      git rebase --continue
      git push --force-with-least origin branchname

Your branch will now be rebased to the current master and your pull request should update and reflect that.

### Rejected pushes

If you get a "rejected" error message when you try to push, it's probably because someone else pushed a change onto your remote repository and your local repository is currently behind.  The fix is to update your local repository by doing

      git pull origin branchname

> This could result in a conflict that would have to be resolved.

Author: Pushes can be rejected for a few reasons:
1) you rebased your branch and had pushed it before (this is explained above), and now you push again
2) you collaborate with another developer on a shared branch in a shared repository, and the branch in the remote repo advanced while your local branch also advanced, and they have now diverged.
3) you work on your branch from different clones of CICE (maybe because you work from different machines), and now your local branch has diverged from the remote branch.

There are other situations but these are the main ones.

I think that having this section here can be confusing because we just told the user what to do when rebasing (pushing with `--force-with-lease`). So I think this would be better in the "Collaborating on Development" section, because most user will usually work on their own branches.

Reviewer: This is a good point.  I think the current documentation applies to case 2 in your list.  I think for this document, we need not explain all the possible ways a push can be rejected.  I think number 2 is the one we've been running into and it's sufficient to limit discussion to that case for now.  If we find users are running into other reasons pushes are rejected, we can update the document.  This is not supposed to be comprehensive, just helpful.

Author: Allright. Then let's move it to "Collaborating on Development".

### Push to a different repository

As noted above, you can pull from a repository that is different from your origin repository.  You can also push to a different remote repository.  If you wanted to copy someone else's branch onto your fork, you could

     git clone https://github.com/anotheruser/CICE CICE.branchname
     cd CICE.branchname
     git checkout branchname

>      git add myrepo https://github.com/myusername/CICE

Author: ```suggestion
     git remote add myrepo https://github.com/myusername/CICE
```

You could also do that from an existing clone.

Reviewer: Good point, maybe we can remove the git clone part of the steps.  You just need to add the remote and push to it.

## Refreshing your PR

There are times where a PR is conflicting with the destination code, where the PR shows changes related to pulls from master, where the PR isn't running correctly, or where the PR just is not reviewable or readable for various reasons.  One option is to pull (or pull --rebase) the Consortium master to your branch.  Sometimes this creates problems for the PR.  Another option is to create a new branch and reissue the PR.  Lets assume the current branch is called feature.  These steps (or similar) should allow you to continue fairly quickly

>      (delete pull request for feature branch)

Author: ```suggestion
     (close pull request for feature branch)
```

     git clone https://github.com/user/cice cice.feature2
     cd cice.feature2
     git remote add upstream https://github.com/cice-consortium/cice
     git pull upstream master
     git push origin master
     git branch feature2
     git checkout feature2
     git pull origin feature
     git submodule update --init
       (review and test)
     git add ...
     git commit -m "pull feature branch to feature2 branch"
     git push origin feature2
     (create pull request for feature2 branch)

# Submodules

## Submodule Overview

> Icepack is a submodule of CICE.  Submodules are pointers to specific versions in an external repository.  Working with Icepack in CICE is like working with a repository in a repository.  When Icepack is cloned by CICE as a submodule, a specific version of Icepack will be downloaded.  Without going into too much detail, Icepack will in a detached HEAD state which means it is a fixed version and cannot be modified easily.  

Author: ```suggestion
Icepack is a submodule of CICE.  Git submodules are pointers to specific versions in an external repository.  Working with Icepack in CICE is like working with a repository in a repository.  When Icepack is cloned by CICE as a submodule, a specific version of Icepack will be checked out.  Without going into too much detail, Icepack will be in a detached HEAD state which means it is a fixed version and cannot be modified easily.  
```

The whole Icepack repo is cloned, but a specific commit is checked out.

         HEAD detached at 192fbaa
         nothing to commit, working directory clean

> In this case, the CICE has downloaded Icepack hash is 192fbaa from the CICE-Consortium repository into the CICE directory structure.

Author: ```suggestion
In this case, the CICE clone procedure has also cloned Icepack from the CICE-Consortium repository and checked out Icepack at hash 192fbaa into the CICE directory structure.
```

## Update Icepack in CICE

If all you want to do is change the Icepack version in CICE in the Consortium repository, then you would create a branch, switch the Icepack version, git add Icepack in CICE, commit, and issue a pull request,

      git clone https://github.com/username/CICE cice.mybranch 
      cd cice.mybranch
      (update to Consortium CICE master if needed)
      git branch mybranch
      git checkout mybranch
      git submodule update --init
      cd icepack
      git status                # should be in a detached HEAD

>       git branch --all --list   # figure out what to checkout

Author: ```suggestion
       git log   # figure out what hash to checkout
```
Once an Icepack PR is merged in the Consortium Icepack repo, the name of the Icepack PR branch is irrelevant, since we don't keep references to PR branches in the Consortium repo. So `git branch` will not help finding the right hash. `git log` would be more helpful.
Then the next command would be :
~~~
git checkout <hash>  # checkout a new version of Icepack from the Consortium
~~~

Reviewer: Good point, I agree.

      git push origin mybranch
      (create PR for CICE)

> This is the standard procedure for updating the Icepack submodule in CICE.

Author: ```suggestion
This is the standard procedure for updating the Icepack submodule in CICE. This is usually done as a preparatory step to make new features in Icepack available in CICE.
```

When I was first reading the Git Workflow guidance when I started out, this part kind of confused me because I did not understand who it was written for, or why I should do something link this as a CICE contributor, so I think it's good to mention why someone would want to update Icepack in CICE.

Reviewer: I'm not sure how it's a preparatory step?  This updates the Icepack version in CICE.  Maybe we're thinking of this different ways?

Author: I was thinking of preparatory in the sense that if you add a new feature in Icepack that you want to make available in CICE, you usually have to:
1. Do the changes in Icepack, get your Icepack PR merged
2. Update the Icepack version in CICE
3. Update the CICE code accordingly to the new Icepack
4. get your CICE PR merged

So in that sense (2) is preparing for (3-4).

## Resync Icepack in CICE

As indicated in the [pull and rebase section](https://github.com/CICE-Consortium/About-Us/wiki/Git-Workflow-Guidance/#pull-rebase), you will want to update the Icepack submodule whenever you change branches or pull from another repository or branch.  You can do that with

>       git submodule sync

Author: Again, this step is only necessary if someone changed the URL of Icepack in the `.gitmodules` file.

      git submodule update --init

**NOTE: if you have cloned your own version of Icepack in CICE, do NOT do this as you may lose local changes.**

## Development of Icepack under CICE

When you checkout CICE, a specific version of Icepack will also be cloned.  This version is not ready for modifications, and it can be convenient to develop Icepack changes from a CICE sandbox to facilitate testing within CICE.  You can clone a working version of Icepack to sit within CICE easily as follows,

      git clone https://github.com/username/CICE --recursive CICE.icepack.feature   # checkout CICE
      cd CICE.icepack.feature

>       mv Icepack Icepack.00                            # move the default Icepack

Author: ```suggestion
      mv icepack icepack.00                            # move the default Icepack
```

Icepack is all lowercase in CICE; the above does not compile

>       git clone https://github.com/username/Icepack    # clone Icepack separately

Author: I think we should just add a different Icepack remote for that workflow:
~~~bash
git clone --recurse-submodules https://github.com/username/CICE CICE.icepack.feature
cd CICE.icepack.feature
cd icepack
git remote add fork https://github.com/username/Icepack
# "fork" is a user's fork, "origin" stays the Consortium's repo
git checkout -b feature 
# work on Icepack
git push -u fork feature
~~~

It's way less complicated and the status stays clean as there is no Icepack.00 or icepack.orig folder laying around.

We could even
~~~bash
cd icepack
git remote rename origin upstream
git remote add origin https://github.com/username/Icepack
# "upstream" is the consortium and "origin" is the user's fork
~~~
and then the remotes are named the same in both CICE and Icepack (however this does not play well with `git submodule sync`, since this commands is hard-coded to sync the URL of the submodule remote named "origin". This should not be an issue as long as we don't tell users to use that command though.)

Reviewer: The first block of code seems reasonable.  The second I would not recommend.  I think what I propose is clearest in many ways.  Sure, there is the silly mv and stuff, but what I think it does is reinforce the idea that CICE and Icepack are separate repos.  I also worry in the first approach above that someone will do git push origin feature.  Sure, it won't work if origin in the consortium, but it could cause confusion.  I think clearly checking out a different fork provides some additional clarify for new users.  Again, once folks get familiar, hopefully what you propose is how they start to operate.  But I think we want to tailor this to people who are really inexperienced, and I think the process currently documented is easiest in many ways.

Author: The thing with the move+clone approach is that `git status` can never be clean (because the original Icepack folder `icepack.00` will appear as untracked), and I don't think this is something that we should advocate, especially for new Git users, as that also causes confusion.

One other thing is that by cloning CICE and Icepack separately, there is no guarantee that the cloned versions are compatible! It depends on when the developer has syncronized there CICE and Icepack forks. It is possible that the initial combination won't even compile to begin with, which is a bad way to start developing...

So if we want to stay with the mv+clone approach, I think we should instruct the developer to start from the same commit that is recorded in CICE. That would be:
~~~bash
git clone https://github.com/username/Icepack icepack 
cd icepack
# this checks out Icepack at the commit recorded in the currently checked out CICE branch:
git checkout $(git -C ../ rev-parse HEAD:icepack)  
git branch feature
git checkout feature
~~~
This way the `feature` branch is started off a known working state.

>       git clone https://github.com/username/Icepack    # clone Icepack separately

Author: ```suggestion
      git clone https://github.com/username/Icepack icepack  # clone Icepack separately
```

>       cd Icepack

Author: ```suggestion
      cd icepack
```

      git branch feature
      git checkout feature

You now have a copy of Icepack from your personal fork on a new branch in your CICE sandbox.  You can develop, test, commit, and push Icepack changes.  You can also test CICE in this sandbox.  Eventually, you can create an Icepack Pull Request.  In this mode of development, you will probably not be committing any changes to the CICE repository nor should you worry about anything related to the submodule in CICE.  You are just developing Icepack within a CICE sandbox.

## Develop CICE and Icepack Concurrently

> There are a number of different ways to handle development of Icepack and CICE concurrently.  What we strongly recommend is that you checkout CICE and Icepack from your fork and develop each within a single sandbox but as independent repositories.  Eventually, you'll do a PR for Icepack.  Once that is accepted, you can [update the submodule in CICE](https://github.com/CICE-Consortium/About-Us/wiki/Git-Workflow-Guidance/#Update-Icepack-in-CICE) and create a CICE PR.  The basic steps are

Author: Here also I would instruct users to simply add a remote in Icepack:
~~~bash
git clone --recurse-submodules https://github.com/username/CICE CICE.icepack.feature
cd CICE.icepack.feature
cd icepack
git remote add fork https://github.com/username/Icepack
# "fork" is a user's fork, "origin" stays the Consortium's repo
git checkout -b feature 
# work on Icepack
git push -u fork feature
# work on Icepack
git push 
cd ../
git checkout -b feature
# work on CICE
git push -u origin feature
# work on CICE
git push
# etc.
~~~

here also, if we start with
~~~
cd icepack
git remote rename origin upstream
git remote add origin https://github.com/username/Icepack
~~~
then the initial push would be 
~~~bash
git push -u origin feature
~~~
in both CICE and Icepack.

Reviewer: See above.  Maybe we can add an example somewhere to show this more advanced approach.  But I'm not sure we want to completely abandon the current recommendation.

Author: I'm okay with adding this as an alternate "Advanced approach".

1.  clone CICE from user repository (fork)
1.  update CICE repository master to Consortium version if needed
1.  create and checkout a CICE branch
1.  remove/move Icepack
1.  clone Icepack from user repository (fork)
1.  update Icepack repository master to Consortium version if needed
1.  create and checkout an Icepack branch

> 1.  develop/commit/push Icepack changes to the Icepack remote repository on the Icepack branch.  Develop/commit/push CICE changes to CICE remote repository on the CICE branch.  **Do not update the Icepack submodule in CICE**

Author: This workflow is more or less OK if there is a single developer. However, if the there are more than one developer, I would suggest to also commit any Icepack version changes (new Icepack commits) in CICE as you develop. If not, another developer cloning the CICE branch will potentially get failing builds (ex. because of interface changes). I usually try to create only compilable commits...

At the end of the process when the Icepack PR is merged then you update Icepack to the Consortium version. (steps 9-11 stay the same).

Author: Also 
> **Do not update the Icepack submodule in CICE**

this could be more precise ; are we talking about A) (in CICE)
~~~bash
git add icepack
git commit
~~~
or B) (also in CICE)
~~~bash
git submodule update
~~~
? 

If we don't commit in CICE as we go along, we are not doing A), and we should not either do B) since this will checkout Icepack at the commit recorded in CICE and detach Icepack's HEAD, and then we would have to 
~~~bash
cd icepack
git checkout feature
~~~
(this should be mentioned if we stay with this workflow)

If however we do commit in Icepack and CICE as we go (we do A)), then doing B) is not harmful because in this case `git submodule udpate` [will *not* detach HEAD](https://git-scm.com/docs/git-submodule#Documentation/git-submodule.txt-checkout), so we do not have to go back in Icepack and switch branches again.

Reviewer: The submodule thing is creating problems even for our group of developers.  What I have recommended is to work on Icepack and CICE separately and if you're working with others, to communicate.  Changing the fork of the submodule is not something we want to ever recommend at this point, but that's what would be needed to collaborate with compliant versions of the submodule.  I really don't want to add this level of complexity to our documentation.  Again, I want to simplify where I can and treat this as a getting started guide.  What we recommend should work and it should not introduce too many problems.  I agree that it's not sophisticated, but more experienced users won't really reference this guide.  It's the beginners we need to target.

In the above I think I was thinking of A.  Separately in the document, I think I note not to do B if you have a modified version of Icepack in your sandbox.  Generally, both A and B should be avoided if a user is doing anything with Icepack under CICE.  We can make that clearer.

Author: > Changing the fork of the submodule is not something we want to ever recommend at this point, but that's what would be needed to collaborate with compliant versions of the submodule.

As I showed [here](https://github.com/phil-blain/CICE-Consortium-About-Us-wiki/pull/1#discussion_r358936302) , it is not necessary to "change the fork" (I think here you mean changing the Icepack URL in `.gitmodules`) in order for a local checkout of CICE to reference a different Icepack fork than the Consortium repo, it can be changed in the local configuration only. But I agree it's more involved on the technical level. 

I can live with not commiting in CICE.

> Generally, both A and B should be avoided if a user is doing anything with Icepack under CICE. We can make that clearer.

If we go this way, yes. We indeed should make that clearer.

      git config --file=.gitmodules submodule.icepack.url https://github.com/username/Icepack.git  # change the repository

>       git config --file=.gitmodules submodule.icepack.branch master

Author: ```suggestion
```
This should never have to be changed IMO

>       git config --file=.gitmodules -l

Author: ```suggestion
       git config --file=.gitmodules --list  # check the changes
```

Author: I'd also change the first `git config` command to:
~~~
git config --file=.gitmodules --list  # show submodule configuration
~~~

>       git submodule sync                          # this syncs to the new submodule.icepack.url repo

Author: ```suggestion
      git submodule sync                          # this syncs the new submodule.icepack.url repo to the local Git configuration
```

>       git submodule update --init                 # this checks out the new repo

Author: ```suggestion
```

If the list of previous commands is followed as-is, this step is a noop because CICE was cloned with `--recursive`, so Icepack is already `init`'d, cloned and checked out at the version recorded in  master.

      cd icepack
      git remote -v                               # verify origin
      git checkout something                      # change the version of Icepack
      cd ../

>       git add icepack

Author: ```suggestion
       git add icepack .gitmodules
```

If we really want to record a commit that changes the Icepack URL,  `.gitmodules` has to be added and commited too.

      git commit -m "switch icepack to different repository and hash"
      git push origin mybranch

Again, this should be avoided in most cases.  We recommend [developing CICE and Icepack concurrently](https://github.com/CICE-Consortium/About-Us/wiki/Git-Workflow-Guidance/#Develop-CICE-and-Icepack-concurrently) and treating the two repositories independently until the Icepack submodule in CICE can be easily updated from a version on the Consortium master.

## Remove and Replace the Icepack Submodule

> This is not something you should normally do, but it's another way to change the Icepack submodule repository,

Author: ```suggestion
This is not something you should normally do, but it's another way to reset the Icepack submodule to the Consortium repository:
```

      cd CICE

>       git submodule deinit -f icepack

Author: ```suggestion
       git submodule deinit icepack
```

I would not suggest `--force` here, as local submodule modifications will be deleted if this flag is used.

      git add icepack
      git commit -m “switch to Icepack version xyz”

# Final Notes

## Overall Workflow

To summarize, a typical workflow for development on a branch would be

      git clone https://github.com/username/CICE cice.mybranch --recursive
      cd cice.mybranch
      git remote add upstream https://github.com/cice-consortium/CICE
      git pull upstream master
      git push origin master

>       git submodule update

Author: It would make more sense to update the submodule just after the pull, but it's not crucial here (the end result is the same).

      git branch mybranch
      git checkout mybranch
         (develop and test)
      git status
      git add file1 file2     
      git rm file3
      git commit -m “developed something and tested on mybranch”
         (develop and test)
      git add file4
      git commit -m "updated something again"

>       git pull --rebase upstream master

Author: ```suggestion
      git pull --rebase upstream master
      git submodule update
```
Icepack could have been updated upstream in the meantime

         (test)

>       git commit -m "rebase to master"

Author: ```suggestion
```
There is no manual commit after rebasing.

Reviewer: Good point.

      git push origin mybranch
      (create the Pull Request)

## Collaborating on Development

Collaboration on model development features is encouraged.  When collaborating, there are some things to consider

* Communicate regularly regarding working branches, priorities, and pushes.

> * Define a prime repository for the work to exist and either provide write access to others or PR changes from other working repositories to the prime repository.

Author: I think some detailed examples would be good here, like:
**If all developers have write access to the prime repository:**
~~~bash
# Bob and Alice decide to collaborate on a branch
# They agree that Bob's fork will be the prime (central) repository for this branch
# Bob gives Alice write permission to his fork
# Bob creates a branch locally and pushes it to his fork
(bob) $ git checkout feature 
# work (git add, git commit)
(bob) $ git push -u origin feature # push and setup tracking for this branch
# Alice adds Bob's fork as a remote and checks out the branch locally
(alice) $ git remote add bob https://github.com/bob/CICE
(alice) $ git fetch bob feature
(alice) $ git checkout feature # this will setup branch 'feature' to track Bob's fork
# work
(alice) $ git pull --rebase  # stay in sync with Bob's work
(alice) $ git push  # push to Bob's fork
# Bob does the same:
(bob) $ git checkout feature 
# work
(bob) $ git pull --rebase # stay in sync with Alice's work
(bob) $ git push
~~~
Here, maybe we could link to the "Centralized Workflow" page at Atlassian's : https://www.atlassian.com/git/tutorials/comparing-workflows

Author: **If not all developers have write access to the prime repository:**
~~~bash
# Bob and Alice decide to collaborate on a branch
# They agree that Bob's fork will be the prime (central) repository for this branch
# Bob creates a branch locally and pushes it to his fork
(bob) $ git checkout feature 
# work (git add, git commit)
(bob) $ git push -u origin feature # push and setup tracking for this branch
# Alice adds Bob's fork as a remote and checks out the branch locally
(alice) $ git remote add bob https://github.com/bob/CICE
(alice) $ git fetch bob feature
(alice) $ git checkout feature # this will setup branch 'feature' to track Bob's fork
# work
(alice) $ git pull --rebase  # stay in sync with Bob's work
(alice) $ git push origin feature # Alice pushes to her fork
# Bob makes sure to integrate Alice's commits:
(bob) $ git checkout feature 
# work
(bob) $ git pull --rebase alice feature # stay in sync with Alice's work
(bob) $ git push
~~~
--- 
In both cases, `git pull --rebase` could be replaced with just `git pull`, though this would create merge commits whenever the histories diverge.

Author: Note that in both scenarios above, GitHub PR's are *not* used.
If the developers **want** to use GitHub PR's we should maybe give advice as to how the owner of the "prime" repo should accept these PR's ([true merge][squash], ["rebase+merge"][rebase] or ["squash+merge"][squash]).

- true merge would be approximately the same as doing `git pull` instead of `git pull --rebase` in the above scenarios, but it would always create merge commits (GitHub "Merge" button is `git merge --no-ff`); this can easily get messy if it happens a lot.
- squash+merge should **not** be used here IMO because it would obfuscate changes, and would really confuse `git pull --rebase`. Even if `git pull` is used instead, there would always be a merge commit, with the big commit with all changes squashed as first parent, and the head commit of the original PR as the second parent... this would be very confusing for Git and for us!
- rebase+merge *could* be used to get almost the same outcome as the manual approach above (with `git pull --rebase`), but the GitHub documentation notes:
> The rebase and merge behavior on GitHub deviates slightly from git rebase. Rebase and merge on GitHub will always update the committer information **and create new commit SHAs** [*emphasis added*]

This means that after Bob integrates Alice's changes, and Alice wants to work some more on  `feature`, she will be able to 
`git pull --rebase` as [rebase skips commits with identical changes that were already applied upstream][rebase-doc]:
> If the upstream branch already contains a change you have made (e.g., because you mailed a patch which was applied upstream), then that commit will be skipped. 

*However*, in order to push to her branch she will have to **force push**, since the SHAs have now changed in her local branch.
This is also an additionnal complication, and potentially confusing for Alice.

---
So all three approaches for PR's have downsides; I think we should *not* use PR's for collaborating on a branch.

[true]: https://help.github.com/en/github/collaborating-with-issues-and-pull-requests/about-pull-request-merges
[rebase]: https://help.github.com/en/github/collaborating-with-issues-and-pull-requests/about-pull-request-merges#rebase-and-merge-your-pull-request-commits
[squash]: https://help.github.com/en/github/collaborating-with-issues-and-pull-requests/about-pull-request-merges#squash-and-merge-your-pull-request-commits
[rebase-doc]: https://git-scm.com/docs/git-rebase#_description

Author: Also, it's kind of funny that both Bob and Alice are really in the Consortium!  :stuck_out_tongue:

Reviewer: These are all very good points.  Yes, maybe we should just recommend pulling from each others repos rather that issuing PRs.  I think your proposal is probably cleaner and less risky.  And I'm happy to add some examples here!

> * Use `git pull prime_repo branchname` frequently to ensure your local repository is up to date with the prime repository.

Author: As explained above, I would suggest using `git pull --rebase prime_repo branchname` as this will avoid useless merge commits if local and remote histories have diverged.

Author: > As explained above,

actually it ended up below :P

> * If a push is rejected, your local repository is behind the prime repository.  Use `git pull prime_repo branchname` to fix this.

Author: Same here :
```suggestion
* If a push is rejected, your local repository is behind the prime repository.  Use `git pull --rebase prime_repo branchname` to fix this.
```

* Conflicts can arise, you'll need to resolve them occasionally.

> * If working collaboratively on both CICE and Icepack at the same time, be particularly careful to communicate changes.  Try to avoid committing changes to the Icepack submodule in CICE unless it's well thought out.

Author: We should also make an example here, this can be quite involved.

We would want to mention one important aspect:
If a developer (say Bob) is working on a feature that involves changes to both CICE and Icepack, and is committing changes in both repository as he work (as I suggest above and as Lettie, Elizabeth and Tony seemed to have done for the flow size distribution), then it's important for a second developer (say Alice) collaborating on this feature to correctly initialize the submodule in order for the Icepack clone (upon `git submodule update`) to work correctly, or else she will receive the dreaded 
> Server does not allow request for unadvertised object

error because Git will look for commits in the Consortium's Icepack repo that are only present in Bob's fork. 

So in a case like this, the workflow for Alice would be:
~~~bash
git clone https://github.com/bob/CICE cice  # note: we don't clone recursively here
# it's also possible to do everything in an already cloned CICE from Alice's fork but it's more involved
cd cice
git checkout feature
git config submodule.icepack.url https://github.com/bob/Icepack # change the local configuration for the Icepack URL
git submodule update # this will init and clone Bob's Icepack fork. (adding `--init` does not hurt but is not necessary)
cd icepack
git checkout feature
git remote add upstream https://github.com/CICE-Consortium/Icepack
git remote -v
# "upstream" is Consortium and "origin" is Bob's fork
cd ..
git remote -v
# same thing
# if Alice can't write to Bob's fork, she can add her fork in Icepack and CICE:
git remote add fork https://github.com/alice/Icepack
cd icepack
git remote add fork https://github.com/alice/Icepack
~~~

Reviewer: My preference is to not document this.  I fear folks will create more problems than solutions.  If people communicate, keep the Icepack and CICE repos separate, and not commit Icepack changes in CICE until the end, I think it's a lot easier to follow and a lot less risky.

Author: I guess I can live with that... we can always reevaluate in the future as we get more comfortable and know what kind of issues can arise (as with the FSD PR's).

## Submodule Problems

It's easy to accidently update the Icepack submodule in CICE when you don't mean to.  If Icepack has been modified, updated, or switched in a CICE sandbox, that will show up as an Icepack difference in `git status`.  If you do `git commit -a` you will automatically change the Icepack submodule hash in CICE.  To undo that, the recommended procedure would be to formally [update Icepack in CICE](https://github.com/CICE-Consortium/About-Us/wiki/Git-Workflow-Guidance/#Update-Icepack-in-CICE) to the correct version and then continue working.  That might involve moving your working Icepack directory, checking out a version of Icepack from the Consortium, switching to the correct version (hash), and then committing Icepack to CICE.  You can then move your working version of Icepack back into your sandbox.

> We suggest avoiding `git commit -a` if there are Icepack changes.  Use `git add` and `git commit` to explicitly add the set of changes that are desired.  You can use `git add` on a directory to add everything under that directory to speed up the process.

Author: I would just suggest to always avoid `git commit -a` :P
```suggestion
We suggest avoiding `git commit -a`.  Use `git add` and `git commit` to explicitly add the set of changes that are desired.  You can use `git add` on a directory to add everything under that directory to speed up the process.
```

Reviewer: I can live with that.

If the submodule is problematic, just checkout a new copy of Icepack, continue to work, and avoid submodule commands.  The CICE submodule setting can be fixed as a separate step.  If you really get stuck, create a new sandbox and start again.  Do not delete the old sandbox in case you need to recover anything.  You should be able to create a useful sandbox and then carefully step forward using the appropriate process.   Finally, feel free to contact folks in the Consortium thru the bulletin board for help.  The bulletin board is linked on the [resource page](https://github.com/CICE-Consortium/About-Us/wiki/Resource-Index).

## Problems with Pull Requests

> Sometimes a pull request will have conflicts with the current master.  Those conflicts will need to be resolved before the pull request can be executed.  In those cases, the development branch should be updated to any changes from the Consortium Master.  That process is documented in the section related to [updating a branch from the Consortium master](https://github.com/CICE-Consortium/About-Us/wiki/Git-Workflow-Guidance#update-a-branch-from-consortium-master)

Author: ```suggestion
Sometimes a pull request will have conflicts with the current master.  Those conflicts will need to be resolved before the pull request can be merged.  In those cases, the development branch should be updated to any changes from the Consortium master.  That process is documented in the section related to [updating a branch from the Consortium master](https://github.com/CICE-Consortium/About-Us/wiki/Git-Workflow-Guidance#update-a-branch-from-consortium-master)
```

>  | merge | Merge changes from local repo to sandbox |

Author: ```suggestion
  | merge | Merge changes from two different branches |
```
It's true that the working tree ("sandbox") is updated, but so is the local repo! So I think this description makes more sense.

>  | pull | Download changes to local sandbox (== fetch + merge) |

Author: ```suggestion
  | pull | Download changes to local sandbox (== fetch + merge) |
  | pull --rebase | Download changes to local repo and replay local changes on top (== fetch + rebase) |
```

 | push | Upload changes |

>  | rebase | like pull but updates the base version then replays local changes, same as pull --rebase |

Author: ```suggestion
 | rebase | replays local changes on top of a new base commit |
```

 | remote [-v] [add] | 	Lists/Sets remote repositories in a sandbox |

>  | rm | Removes a file from the repo |

Author: ```suggestion
  | rm | Removes a file from the repo and stages the deletion |
```

 | status    | Provides summary of status of sandbox |
 | submodule | 	Many options, useful for working with submodules |
 | tag -a | Create a tag or list tags |

>  | update | Pull updates into the local sandbox |

Author: ̀git update` is not a Git command... 
```suggestion
```

Reviewer: oops.

### Further Information

There are many git commands to diagnose the status of your sandbox.

#### Status
Status provides a summary of the status of your sandbox.  

      git status

will indicate which branch your sandbox is on and the changes that have been made.  This should be used often during development and before commits and pushes.

#### Diff
Diff shows code changes.

      git diff

If you also want to see the submodule diffs, use

      git diff --submodule

> but it's important to remember that a commit to CICE will NOT commit the Icepack changes to Icepack.

Author: That would not show the submodule diffs, it shows if the submodule is in a different state compared to what is recorded in CICE. For example, if I change something in Icepack and commit it, then in CICE we would have:
~~~bash
$ git diff --submodule # expands to --submodule=log
Submodule icepack 74839d2..15d2db4:
  > Add 'column' to the README
~~~
compare with:
~~~diff
$ git diff # defaults to --submodule=short
diff --git i/icepack w/icepack
index 74839d2..15d2db4 160000
--- i/icepack
+++ w/icepack
@@ -1 +1 @@
-Subproject commit 74839d21286a7b02bc2b29ea49a06cdc013b8683
+Subproject commit 15d2db4304070e1449489baae4589a37e0da816a
~~~

The submodule diffs can be shown with `--submodule=diff`:
~~~diff
$ git -P diff --submodule=diff
Submodule icepack 74839d2..15d2db4:
diff --git i/icepack/README.md w/icepack/README.md
index 262363c..f85106f 100644
--- i/icepack/README.md
+++ w/icepack/README.md
@@ -12,7 +12,7 @@ imperative you follow the guidance for Pull Requests and requisite testing.
 ## Useful links
 * **Icepack wiki**: https://github.com/CICE-Consortium/Icepack/wiki
 
-   Information about the Icepack model
+   Information about the Icepack column model
 
 * **Icepack Version Index**: https://github.com/CICE-Consortium/Icepack/wiki/Icepack-Version-Index
~~~
but I don't think we want to advertise that. 

I do think though that `--submodule=log` is a better default than `--submodule=short`, which is why I recommended setting
~~~bash
git config diff.submodule log
# and 
git config status.submoduleSummary true
~~~
The second command makes `git status` in CICE show any changes in Icepack (as "modified (new commits)", "modified (modified content)" or "modified (untracked content")). I think this is really useful to make sure that Icepack is not accidentally changed in CICE.

Author: As a second example, if I change something in Icepack but do not commit it, a `git diff` in CICE would show:
~~~diff
$ git diff --submodule=short
diff --git i/icepack w/icepack
--- i/icepack
+++ w/icepack
@@ -1 +1 @@
-Subproject commit 74839d21286a7b02bc2b29ea49a06cdc013b8683
+Subproject commit 74839d21286a7b02bc2b29ea49a06cdc013b8683-dirty
~~~
~~~bash
$ git diff --submodule=log
Submodule icepack contains modified content
~~~
~~~diff
$ git diff --submodule=diff
Submodule icepack contains modified content
diff --git i/icepack/README.md w/icepack/README.md
index 262363c..f85106f 100644
--- i/icepack/README.md
+++ w/icepack/README.md
@@ -12,7 +12,7 @@ imperative you follow the guidance for Pull Requests and requisite testing.
 ## Useful links
 * **Icepack wiki**: https://github.com/CICE-Consortium/Icepack/wiki
 
-   Information about the Icepack model
+   Information about the Icepack column model
 
 * **Icepack Version Index**: https://github.com/CICE-Consortium/Icepack/wiki/Icepack-Version-Index
~~~

Reviewer: Again, I feel this could confuse folks and lead to a conclusion that these Icepack diffs are somehow part of CICE.  And I'm still not convinced we should do this.  If we emphasize development of CICE and Icepack separately and try to keep them separate as much as possible and downplay all the submodule stuff, I think it's easier.

Author: OK... then I guess we should phrase it as "If you also want to see the submodule changes" as I suggested above.

#### Log
Log summarizes the commits and pushes in your sandbox up to the current state.  The first entry will provide the id of the current model version.

      git log

If you want a useful graphical summary of the log, try

>       git log --graph --oneline --decorate

Author: ```suggestion
      git log --graph --oneline --decorate
      # or
      gitk
```

Some people might prefer a graphical tool (I don't personally use it but it's part of the Git distribution so we might as well mention it?)

* Use “git remote -v” often.
* Always commit with a reasonably detailed and clear commit message.

***

# Appendix C: Terms
_Branch_ - A pointer to a parallel development in a repository    
_Checkout_ - When you switch to a branch in your local repository    
_Commit_ - When you copy changes into your local repository    
_Clone_ - When you copy a github repository into a local sandbox    
_Fetch_ - When you update your local repository from an external repository    
_Fork_ - When you copy a repository within github from one github project to another    

> _Hash_ - Particular version in git defined by a string of random characters generated by git    

Author: ```suggestion
_Hash_ - Particular version in Git defined by a string of hexodecimal characters generated by Git    
```
They are not random characters :p they are the SHA-1 hash of the object they name.

Reviewer: I guess I never fully realized that.  That's sort of interesting.

_Master_ - The main or trunk branch in a github repository    

> _Merge_ - Merging changes from your local repository to your sandbox    

Author: ```suggestion
 _Merge_ - Merging changes from two different branches
```
